Category: Produce & Aquire
Topic: Data Sources Trends

Data can be classified according to various attributes of data such as structured/semi-structured/un-
structured data based on how the data is structured or how the data entities are related or structured
relative to each other such as relational data. Based on the how fast the data is changing, data can be
classified as static data such as reference data, slowly changing data such as Master Data and slow
changing dimensional data, or volatile data such as time series data and transactional data from Point of
Sale (POS) systems. Similarly based on the velocity or speed of movement of data or how fast volatile
data is moved from the source to the destination, data can be classified as fast data that includes
streaming data. Streaming data could include social media data or data from IoT sensor data. Big Data
refers to not only large volumes of data but also includes fast data that becomes large volume when
accumulated over period of data. Big data includes variety of data including structure, semi-structured
and unstructured data. Based on how the data is ageing from the time when the data was generated,
data can be classified as operational data or historical data. Based on how frequently the data is
consumed, data can also be classified as hot, warm, and cold. Often, data within a system in an
organization is not exploited for analytics and such data is referred as dark data.
Modern Data Strategy is no longer limited to Big Data but is agnostic of the type of data and includes
ANY data whether its fast data or slow data, small data, or big data, transactional, operational, or
historical data. There is more and more emphasis on including dark data in scope and bringing it to the
data lake. Adoption of LLM for enterprises could hugely benefit from modern data strategy since it
includes consolidation of unstructured data on the data lake.

We live in a data-saturated world. Billions of interconnected devices communicate with countless cloud services. We accumulate data from server log files, GPS networks, security tools, call records, web traffic and more. Every digital transaction, from backend handoffs to the customer’s fingertips, is catalogued. Everything from the contents of a warehouse’s shelves to the temperature of our server rooms to the time and location of every login to our secure networks is recorded and stored somewhere. Most of it, today, is unstructured, untagged, untapped. In a word, useless.

Dark data represents data not collected and therefore not used. Considering that at least 80%
of data is dark,it represents the great hidden resource that flows untapped through major
organizations. Leveraging dark data in the data integration processes is a challenge as the
most sophisticated data sources—such as network transactions, IoT, mobility, Wi-Fi, or
industrial networks—require an advanced engine specially built for the purpose.
Dark data may be the biggest untapped resource in business today. Dark data, which includes the “data exhaust” generated as a byproduct of our online lives, is all the unknown and untapped data across your organization, generated by systems, devices and interactions. Maybe it’s siloed off somewhere; maybe the format or metadata is inconsistent. Maybe no one’s figured out what to do with it. Maybe you literally don’t know it exists. Most organizations struggle to capitalize on the full potential of their data. A full third of respondents report that more than 75 percent of their organization’s data is dark. Just 11 percent — one in nine — report that less than a quarter of their organization’s data is dark. Inadequate processes, resources and technology hamper the intelligent use of dark data. Neglected by business and IT managers, dark data is an underused asset that demands a more sophisticated approach to how organizations collect, manage and analyze information. Yet respondents also voiced hesitance about diving in. It’s a challenge, and an opportunity, of surprising scale. Machine data, a major source of dark data, is growing much faster than traditional organizational data, with an accelerating importance to decision making and organizational success. And because dark data can be a powerful fuel for artificial intelligence, organizations that fail to tap its power will also fail to keep up with, much less surpass, their competitors. And competition is global. Organizations must grasp the opportunities and confront the challenges of dark data — through greater strategic thinking, targeted technology investment, and more energetic and comprehensive skills training — to take full advantage of the next data revolution. Organizations need to think now about how to bring dark data into the light. All the unknown and untapped data across your company, generated by systems, devices and interactions. 

Why Data Stays Dark? 
Dark data contains records of all the activity and behavior of customers, users, transactions, applications, servers, networks and mobile devices. It includes configurations, message queues, the output of diagnostic commands, call detail records, sensor data from industrial systems, and more. Dark data, in short, is any data that isn’t being used. That includes the many types of data generated by an organization’s systems and applications, from machine data to server log files to customer and user data to sentiment analysis derived from social media. It’s the byproduct of day-to-day business activity, both within an organization and across the ecosystem of customers, partners and suppliers. It can be data that is considered too old or outdated to provide value, data in a format that can’t be accessed with the tools available to the organization, incomplete data or duplicate data — any data that needs to be “cleaned” before it can be used. Often, organizations ignore potentially valuable data because they don’t have the time or resources to prepare it for use. Or they may not understand its full potential. Or they may be bogged down in the status quo, meeting day-to-day requirements rather than looking ahead for opportunities. By definition, an organization’s dark data is the most difficult to access. How do organizations improve their access to dark data and the insights it holds? Traditionally, the quick and easy (if expensive) solution was to hire a consultancy and have them explore dark data in all the data sources by doing a data scan. Today’s dark data could one day be an accelerant for even greater AI performance. Thus, the advent of AI and the value of dark data go hand-in-hand. Dark data provides an enormous, untapped resource of information that AI can analyze. And AI-powered analytics tools can help make dark data ready for analysis on a scale that would be impossible with current methods. On the one hand, dark data and artificial intelligence hold almost unlimited potential to transform business and society, and working with data will be essential to virtually every job in their organizations. On the other hand, these business and IT leaders have low confidence in their own knowledge about AI and the data their company possesses. They’re even more skeptical of their colleagues’ and their organization’s readiness to take advantage of the potential both in their troves of untapped data and in the power of AI. Make “data driven” a reality, and make sure your approach to data helps organize and surface it in ways that will let you tap all of its potential. Understand your data. Commit to bringing more of it out of the dark, out of the gray areas, to be a vital part of your decision making. Data, like money, is an asset. Like money, a business has a fundamental responsibility to keep track of it, and use it to best advantage.
